we're going to create a new text file and call it data.txt. In that file we're
just going to add four lines of simple text. This is the first line, this is a
second, here is the third line and here, the fourth. When we've done that we
can save our file. Then we're going to create a new Python file and
call that quiz.py. So, in our python script we want to add the following code.
We want to define a variable f and it will open our data txt file for
reading. Then we're going to call the readlines()
method and put that in the variable lines. We'll close our file handle and
then we'll print the results to screen. When we save and run this, our output
will be as follows. The code opened the file, read the
lines into a variable called lines and as you can see, we have a list of
strings. We can also see that each one contains a newline character, which is
the \n and this makes sense because the file contains four separate
lines. The readlines() method splits this at those newline characters to
create a line of strings. If we modify it slightly and use the read() method instead
of readlines(), then see how it changes. Now, all of the data is read into a
single string including the newline characters it now appears just as text and
not as a list of strings. The newline character causes the string to be
displayed over the four lines of our file. A very simple practical thing
we can do with text files is to count the occurrences of words. The Project
Gutenberg website provides books that are out of copyright in text format.
For this example we'll use "The Secret Adversary", by Agatha Christie. So,
open up the link below as we are doing here, and select some text. Take about a
page of it. I'm going to copy that, and then we'll create a new file in our
project, which we're going to call book.txt. Then we can paste our text
into it. Save that and then create a new Python script called book.py.
Here we're going to use two standard libraries: the first one is the re
library for regular expressions, and the next one is the collections library that
allows us to count the occurrences of words. Now we'll put everything on one
line. Here we'll read everything into a string called text use the read() method.
Have it all in lowercase, and then we're going to use the regular expressions
findall() method with the pattern here - we'll explain that in just a minute -
and our text string. Finally, we're going to use the counter() method from our
collections, and we're also going to find the ten most common
words. So, let's save that and run it and see what result we get. Now, notice
that the entire contents of the file have been read into this string called
text, and then notice afterwards that the findall() method is used to pass that string
and find words. We don't have time to discuss everything about regular
expressions here, but the findall() method ensures that all occurrences of the
pattern are found. The pattern we're using is \w+
The w denotes anything that's not a whitespace, and the plus denotes one or more. So, for every
occurrence of one or more characters that are not whitespace, we view that as
a word. We may get some false positives - it's not perfect but it works fine for
our purposes here. Then, the counter() method from collections counts how many
occurrences there are and the most_common() method limits the results to ten
words. We see that we have then a list of tuples, where each tuple contains
the word and the number of occurrences. So that is how to read from a file! In
our next unit we're going to look at relative versus absolute paths.
